# Databases

Two databases are used, a read-write cache database, and a read-only
text file database held on a remote service (such as Google Drive.)

## Local Cache database

The local cache DB contains a cached copy of the text files in the
remote DB, a number of data files generated by the application
such as compressor and loan records, and `config.json` which stores
most of the configuration.

Included in the distribution is an interface suitable for using a
WebDAV server as the cache server. It would be easy to extend the application
to interface to a different store provider, should you need to do so.

The cache server is accessed through the *Local cache URL* which
points to the root folder of the cache. This setting is stored in the `cache_url`
cookie in the browser. The cookie can be initialised/overridden by the
`?cache_url=` URL parameter when the application is started.

### Using a WebDAV server
It's easy to set up a WebDAV server, even on a mobile device.  Most
web server implementations include a WebDAV module (though note that
your server must support CORS, and not all do). We use "HTTP Server
powered by Apache" by Tautvydas Andrikys, which is easy to set up and
configure on Android.

For example, you might configure an Apache server on Linux as follows:
```
DavLockDB /var/www/html/webdav/DavLockDB

# Add a rewrite to respond with a 200 SUCCESS on every OPTIONS request.
# This is required for CORS
RewriteEngine On
RewriteCond %{REQUEST_METHOD} OPTIONS
RewriteRule ^(.*)$ $1 [R=200,L]

<Location /webdav>
  # CORS
  Header always set Access-Control-Allow-Origin "*"
  # These are the methods used by Sheds
  Header always set Access-Control-Allow-Methods "GET, OPTIONS, PUT, PROPFIND, MKCOL"
  Header always set Access-Control-Max-Age "1000"
  Header always set Access-Control-Allow-Headers "x-requested-with, Content-Type, origin, authorization, accept, client-security-token, depth, cache-control"

  Dav On
  AuthType Basic
  AuthName "Login required"

  AuthUserFile "/var/www/html/webdav/.passwd"
  Require valid-user
</Location>
```
You will need to provide the URL of your cache server to the user interface.

Note that we only support Basic Auth.

## Read-only Database

Access to the database is via a single <b>Remote DB index URL</b> which has
to be provided in the configuration. The application
doesn't care how you manage the data in the database, all it requires is access
to CSV files. The remote DB is only referenced when
it is required to update the local cache copy.

Click <b>Update Cache From Web</b> to update the cache database from the
remote database (requires that the machine running the application is currently connected to the internet.)

### Remote DB index URL
This is the URL of a CSV document that contains two columns, headed
`sheet` and `url`. The `sheet` column has two entries, `roles` and
`inventory`, each of which has a corresponding entry in the URL
column.
```
sheet, url
roles,http://address-of-roles.csv
inventory,http://address_of_inventory.csv
```

### Roles
The `roles` URL points to a CSV document with two columns, `role` and
`list`.  The `role` column gives the name of a role e.g. `member` and
the `list` column gives a comma-separated list of people who can
perform that role.  There must be at least the following columns:
1. member - club members who are permitted to borrow equipment
2. operator - qualified compressor operators
3. blender - qualified Nitrox blenders

Other lists may be provided in additional columns for future use. Example:
```
role,list
member,"Freddie Mercury,Abraham Lincoln,Nikola Tesla,Sun Tzu"
operator,"Abraham Lincoln,Sun Tzu"
blender,"Sun Tzu"
trainee,"Freddie Mercury"
```

### Inventory
The `inventory` entry in the index is the URL of another CSV document
that has `sheet` and `url` columns. This time the rows correspond to a
tab in the inventory, and the URL is of another sheet that provides
the columns for that tab. For example,
```
sheet,url
Cylinders,http://url-of-cylinders.csv
Regulators,http://url-of-rgeulators-csv
```
It's up to what columns you put in your inventory. An example for a
`Cylinders` sheet might be:
```
ID,Description,Location,Kit Pool
01,Yellow 12L,Cage,Training,
04,Blue pony 3,Cage,Qualified
```
Two columns are special in these sheets, `Location` and `Kit
Pool`. These columns are included in the top-level `Inventory` tab but
are ignored in the inventory pick dialog on the `Loans` tab.

### Setting up the database
There are a number of ways you can manage the database. The simplest
would be to have a number of CSV format files that you manually
edit. Slightly more functional is to publish sheets from spreadsheets
in Google Drive. Or you could create an application (e.g. using PHP)
that would serve the required CSV from your existing database.

Hartford Sub-Aqua Club uses Google Drive. We use proxy spreadsheets to
extract data from the core databases (which are themselves spreadsheets)
using `IMPORTRANGE`. The proxy sheets are then published as CSV. This
approach gives us fine-grained control over what data enters the public
domain.
